T: Description

Micronutrients are nutrients the body needs in smaller amount for development and growth. They are very important to the body's metabolic processes. These include vitamins and minerals. 

T: Micronutrient types

There are four basic types of micronutrients: water-soluble vitamins, fat-soluble vitamins, macrominerals, and trace minerals.

MT: Water-soluble vitamins
They are quickly dissolved and eliminated by urination, so even when excessively ingested they are not stored in the body. The most significant of the group are B vitamins and vitamin C. You need to consume more of them each day because the body is not storing them. They help your body gain energy and promote the health of the body's cells, especially red blood cells. Although they each have a role, they serve related purposes.

Vitamin list: vitamin C(ascorbic acid) and vitamin B complex: thiamin (B1), riboflavin (B2), niacin (B3), pantothenic acid (B5), vitamin B6, biotin (B7), folic acid (B9), and vitamin B12.

MT: Fat-soluble vitamins
They do not dissolve in water and are stored in the liver and fatty tissues. Essential for the proper functioning of the immune system, healthy bone growth, clear vision, and cell protection.

Vitamin list: vitamins A, D, E, K

MT: Macromineral

Needed in higher concentration than trace minerals. A list of significant macrominerals and their roles is:
1. Calcium: Healthy growth and functioning of the bones
2. Phosphorous: A component of cell membranes
3. Magnesium: Needed for the functioning of many enzymes in the body
4. Sodium: regulation of the blood pressure and fluid balance
5. Chloride: Maintains fluid balance and the production of digestive juices
6. Potassium: Transmission of nerve impulses and muscle action
7. Sulfur: Needed for the for formation of genetic material and several important proteins in the body

MT: Trace elements
The body needs a very minimal number of them, but they are responsible for several important functions.

Trace minerals: selenium, iron, iodine, fluoride, copper, zinc, copper, and manganese.

T: Essential functions of micronutrients

Vitamin C: Powerful antioxidant and keeps the immune system healthy
B vitamins: Help the body to obtain energy from the food we eat
Vitamin B12: Produce red blood cells and maintain healthy nerves
Vitamin A: Required for vision, immunity, and healthy skin
Vitamin E: An antioxidant and helps prevent cell damage
Vitamin K: Required for blood clotting and calcium transportation into the bone
Vitamin D: Essential for a healthy immune system, and bone formation, and functions as a hormone throughout the body
Iron: Helps form hemoglobin, the pigment that helps carry oxygen throughout the body
Calcium: Required for muscle contracition and bone growth and strength
Magnesium: Controls muscle contraction and how signals are sent to the nervous system. It also aids in the formation of teeth and bones
Potassiuem: Essential for maintaining fluid and electrolyte balance, healthy nerve conduction, and muscle contraction

T: Micronutrient deficiencies

Micronutrient deficiency is a serious problem that can have various effects on the body. Some common micronutrient deficiencies include:

Anemia: Iron deficiency
Goiter and mental retardation: Iodine deficiency
Rickets, bone loss and muscle weakness: Vitamin D deficiency
Megaloblastic anemia and impaired nerve function: Vitamin B12 deficiency
Osteoporosis: Calcium deficiency
Impaired vision and blindness: Vitamin A deficiency
Muscle cramps and fatigue: Magnesium deficiency